README.md, before:

lean-ga
=========

[![Gitpod ready-to-code](https://img.shields.io/badge/Gitpod-ready--to--code-908a85?logo=gitpod)](https://gitpod.io/#https://github.com/pygae/lean-ga)

A work-in-progress formalization of Geometric Algebra (GA) in the [Lean formal proof verification system](https://github.com/leanprover-community/lean) and using its [Mathematical Library](https://github.com/leanprover-community/mathlib/).

We presented an early version of this at ICCA 2020 ([slides](https://pygae.github.io/lean-ga/ICCA2020)).

A semi-interactive viewer for the contents of this project can be found at https://pygae.github.io/lean-ga-docs/. Of particular interest are:

* Parts of mathlib contributed as part of this work:
  * [`clifford_algebra`](https://pygae.github.io/lean-ga-docs/find/clifford_algebra)
  * [`exterior_algebra`](https://pygae.github.io/lean-ga-docs/find/exterior_algebra)
  * [`alternating_map`](https://pygae.github.io/lean-ga-docs/find/alternating_map)
* Translations of other formalizations:
  * [`geometric_algebra/translations/hol_light.lean`](https://pygae.github.io/lean-ga-docs/geometric_algebra/translations/hol_light.html)
  * [`geometric_algebra/translations/ida.lean`](https://pygae.github.io/lean-ga-docs/geometric_algebra/translations/ida.html)
  * [`geometric_algebra/translations/laurents.lean`](https://pygae.github.io/lean-ga-docs/geometric_algebra/translations/laurents.html)
* Additional API on top of the mathlib `clifford_algebra`:
  * [`geometric_algebra/from_mathlib/versors.lean`](https://pygae.github.io/lean-ga-docs/geometric_algebra/from_mathlib/versors.html), a formalization of versors
  * [`geometric_algebra/from_mathlib/concrete/cga.lean`](https://pygae.github.io/lean-ga-docs/geometric_algebra/from_mathlib/concrete/cga.html), a formalization of CGA
  * [`geometric_algebra/from_mathlib/concrete/quaternion.lean`](https://pygae.github.io/lean-ga-docs/geometric_algebra/from_mathlib/concrete/quaternion.html), a proof that the quaternions are isomorphic to a clifford algebra

To get the full experience of using lean-ga without having to install lean, use the GitPod link at the top of this readme.
Wait for the command in the console to finish, then open one of the files referenced above, and wait for compilation to finish (the orange bars to vanish).
At this point, you can move the cursor around to view the proof state, and try adding new statements to the file using our definitions

Development Status
--------------------

Early. Currently it's only in the design phase and the infrastructure is being set up and experimented.

Formalization Goals
--------------------

TL;DR:

The primary goal is to have a series of loosely coupled definitions of GA, some are constructive, some the algorithmic, some are mathematical, but they can all be shown to be an instance of one or a few general type classes focusing on the behaviors and propertie rather than representations and thus a lot of theorems/identities proven for the general type classes will automatically apply. During the process, keep the formalization as readable as the math in the usual GA literature, and in a coordinate-free fashion as long as possible.

The full version:

1. Formalize Geometric Algebra in a generic way that
    - doesn't depend on data structures, not even canonical structures
    - contains only how the algebra works and its natural relations to other abstract mathematical structures by leveraging the power of Type Class in Lean 
    - is deeply rooted in its mathematical foundation while keeping its accessibility to common GA users
2. Formalize geometric objects (in PGA, CGA, for example) based on the generic formalization
3. Verify the equivalence or explore the relations of various formalisms of Geometric Algebra
4. Verify the correctness and computational properties of various Geometric Algebra data structures and algorithms
5. Develops tactics and automations specific to Geometric Algebra using Lean's powerful metaprogramming framework
6. Formalize important or interesting applications of Geometric Algebra
    - such as the ones demonstrated by https://enkimute.github.io/ganja.js/examples/coffeeshop.html
7. Numerical GA Code generator for various programming languages with a rich set of options from various verified Geometric Algebra data structures and algorithms
    - inspired by https://github.com/vincentnozick/garamon and https://github.com/enkimute/ganja.js
8. Symbolic rewrite rule generator for Rule-based rewriting languages
    - e.g. https://github.com/JuliaSymbolics/SymbolicUtils.jl
9. Verify GA libraries by pluggable bridges with them
    - e.g. https://github.com/chakravala/Grassmann.jl , https://github.com/jeremyong/gal , https://github.com/RobinKa/tfga , to name a few interested but really challenging ones
    - using tools/APIs summarized in https://leanprover.zulipchat.com/#narrow/stream/113488-general/topic/Examples.20of.20communicating.20with.20Lean
10. Formalize Geometric Calculus

Besides all of the above, the code and documentation should be readable for common users and provide references for further reading.

Project Structure
--------------------

```bash
# Github actions like https://github.com/leanprover-community/mathlib/blob/master/.github/workflows/build.yml
├── .github
# VSCode settings like https://github.com/leanprover-community/mathlib/blob/master/.vscode/settings.json              
├── .vscode
# Docs like https://github.com/leanprover-community/mathlib/tree/master/docs using https://github.com/leanprover-community/doc-gen and possibly https://github.com/leanprover-community/format_lean and https://github.com/leanprover-community/lean-client-python
# also docs like https://github.com/avigad/mathematics_in_lean_source
├── docs
# The accompanying paper like https://arxiv.org/abs/1910.09336 and https://arxiv.org/abs/1910.12320
# Possibly will be written using https://manubot.org/
├── paper
# Scripts like https://github.com/leanprover-community/mathlib/blob/master/scripts/deploy_docs.sh
├── scripts
# Source
├── src
# The root of Geometric Algebra formalization
# Following the layout in mathlib e.g. https://github.com/leanprover-community/mathlib/tree/master/src/linear_algebra
│   ├── geometric_algebra
#           Goal 1
│   │   ├── generic
#           Goal 2
│   │   ├── geometry
#           Goal 3
│   │   ├── formalism
#           Goal 4
│   │   ├── data
│   │   ├── algorithm
#           Goal 5
│   │   ├── tactic
#           Goal 6
│   │   ├── application
#           Goal 7
│   │   ├── codegen
#           Goal 8
│   │   ├── rulegen
#           Goal 9
│   │   ├── libraries
#           Goal 10
│   │   ├── calculus
#           Experimental code
│   │   ├── _nursery
#           Deprecated code that was part of the formalization
│   │   └── _deprecated
# Potential changes to the other directories in mathlib
│   └── ...
# Tests like https://github.com/leanprover-community/mathlib/tree/master/test
└── test
```

Name of the Project
--------------------

Following the practice of https://leanprover-community.github.io/lean-perfectoid-spaces/ , the project should be named `lean-geometric-algebra`, but `lean-ga` is shorter and it sounds not bad.

Commit message:

Remove the complex isomorphism, it's now upstream

README.md, after:

lean-ga
=======

[![Gitpod ready-to-code](https://img.shields.io/badge/Gitpod-ready--to--code-908a85?logo=gitpod)](https://gitpod.io/#https://github.com/pygae/lean-ga)

A work-in-progress formalization of Geometric Algebra (GA) in the [Lean formal proof verification system](https://github.com/leanprover-community/lean) and using its [Mathematical Library](https://github.com/leanprover-community/mathlib/).

We presented an early version of this at ICCA 2020 ([slides](https://pygae.github.io/lean-ga/ICCA2020)).

A semi-interactive viewer for the contents of this project can be found at https://pygae.github.io/lean-ga-docs/. Of particular interest are:

* Parts of mathlib contributed as part of this work:
  * [`clifford_algebra`](https://pygae.github.io/lean-ga-docs/find/clifford_algebra)
    * [`clifford_algebra_ring.equiv`](https://pygae.github.io/lean-ga-docs/find/clifford_algebra_ring.equiv): the real numbers have an isomorphic clifford algebra.
    * [`clifford_algebra_complex.equiv`](https://pygae.github.io/lean-ga-docs/find/clifford_algebra_complex.equiv): the complex numbers have an isomorphic clifford algebra.
    * [`clifford_algebra.as_exterior`](https://pygae.github.io/lean-ga-docs/find/clifford_algebra.as_exterior): the exterior algebra has an isomorphic clifford algebra
  * [`exterior_algebra`](https://pygae.github.io/lean-ga-docs/find/exterior_algebra)
  * [`alternating_map`](https://pygae.github.io/lean-ga-docs/find/alternating_map)
* Translations of other formalizations:
  * [`geometric_algebra/translations/hol_light.lean`](https://pygae.github.io/lean-ga-docs/geometric_algebra/translations/hol_light.html)
  * [`geometric_algebra/translations/ida.lean`](https://pygae.github.io/lean-ga-docs/geometric_algebra/translations/ida.html)
  * [`geometric_algebra/translations/laurents.lean`](https://pygae.github.io/lean-ga-docs/geometric_algebra/translations/laurents.html)
* Additional API on top of the mathlib `clifford_algebra`:
  * [`geometric_algebra/from_mathlib/versors.lean`](https://pygae.github.io/lean-ga-docs/geometric_algebra/from_mathlib/versors.html), a formalization of versors
  * [`geometric_algebra/from_mathlib/concrete/cga.lean`](https://pygae.github.io/lean-ga-docs/geometric_algebra/from_mathlib/concrete/cga.html), a formalization of CGA
  * [`geometric_algebra/from_mathlib/concrete/quaternion.lean`](https://pygae.github.io/lean-ga-docs/geometric_algebra/from_mathlib/concrete/quaternion.html), a proof that the quaternions are isomorphic to a clifford algebra

To get the full experience of using lean-ga without having to install lean, use the GitPod link at the top of this readme.
Wait for the command in the console to finish, then open one of the files referenced above, and wait for compilation to finish (the orange bars to vanish).
At this point, you can move the cursor around to view the proof state, and try adding new statements to the file using our definitions

Development Status
--------------------

Early. Currently it's only in the design phase and the infrastructure is being set up and experimented.

Formalization Goals
--------------------

TL;DR:

The primary goal is to have a series of loosely coupled definitions of GA, some are constructive, some the algorithmic, some are mathematical, but they can all be shown to be an instance of one or a few general type classes focusing on the behaviors and propertie rather than representations and thus a lot of theorems/identities proven for the general type classes will automatically apply. During the process, keep the formalization as readable as the math in the usual GA literature, and in a coordinate-free fashion as long as possible.

The full version:

1. Formalize Geometric Algebra in a generic way that
    - doesn't depend on data structures, not even canonical structures
    - contains only how the algebra works and its natural relations to other abstract mathematical structures by leveraging the power of Type Class in Lean
    - is deeply rooted in its mathematical foundation while keeping its accessibility to common GA users
2. Formalize geometric objects (in PGA, CGA, for example) based on the generic formalization
3. Verify the equivalence or explore the relations of various formalisms of Geometric Algebra
4. Verify the correctness and computational properties of various Geometric Algebra data structures and algorithms
5. Develops tactics and automations specific to Geometric Algebra using Lean's powerful metaprogramming framework
6. Formalize important or interesting applications of Geometric Algebra
    - such as the ones demonstrated by https://enkimute.github.io/ganja.js/examples/coffeeshop.html
7. Numerical GA Code generator for various programming languages with a rich set of options from various verified Geometric Algebra data structures and algorithms
    - inspired by https://github.com/vincentnozick/garamon and https://github.com/enkimute/ganja.js
8. Symbolic rewrite rule generator for Rule-based rewriting languages
    - e.g. https://github.com/JuliaSymbolics/SymbolicUtils.jl
9. Verify GA libraries by pluggable bridges with them
    - e.g. https://github.com/chakravala/Grassmann.jl , https://github.com/jeremyong/gal , https://github.com/RobinKa/tfga , to name a few interested but really challenging ones
    - using tools/APIs summarized in https://leanprover.zulipchat.com/#narrow/stream/113488-general/topic/Examples.20of.20communicating.20with.20Lean
10. Formalize Geometric Calculus

Besides all of the above, the code and documentation should be readable for common users and provide references for further reading.

Project Structure
--------------------

```bash
# Github actions like https://github.com/leanprover-community/mathlib/blob/master/.github/workflows/build.yml
├── .github
# VSCode settings like https://github.com/leanprover-community/mathlib/blob/master/.vscode/settings.json
├── .vscode
# Docs like https://github.com/leanprover-community/mathlib/tree/master/docs using https://github.com/leanprover-community/doc-gen and possibly https://github.com/leanprover-community/format_lean and https://github.com/leanprover-community/lean-client-python
# also docs like https://github.com/avigad/mathematics_in_lean_source
├── docs
# The accompanying paper like https://arxiv.org/abs/1910.09336 and https://arxiv.org/abs/1910.12320
# Possibly will be written using https://manubot.org/
├── paper
# Scripts like https://github.com/leanprover-community/mathlib/blob/master/scripts/deploy_docs.sh
├── scripts
# Source
├── src
# The root of Geometric Algebra formalization
# Following the layout in mathlib e.g. https://github.com/leanprover-community/mathlib/tree/master/src/linear_algebra
│   ├── geometric_algebra
#           Goal 1
│   │   ├── generic
#           Goal 2
│   │   ├── geometry
#           Goal 3
│   │   ├── formalism
#           Goal 4
│   │   ├── data
│   │   ├── algorithm
#           Goal 5
│   │   ├── tactic
#           Goal 6
│   │   ├── application
#           Goal 7
│   │   ├── codegen
#           Goal 8
│   │   ├── rulegen
#           Goal 9
│   │   ├── libraries
#           Goal 10
│   │   ├── calculus
#           Experimental code
│   │   ├── _nursery
#           Deprecated code that was part of the formalization
│   │   └── _deprecated
# Potential changes to the other directories in mathlib
│   └── ...
# Tests like https://github.com/leanprover-community/mathlib/tree/master/test
└── test
```

Name of the Project
--------------------

Following the practice of https://leanprover-community.github.io/lean-perfectoid-spaces/ , the project should be named `lean-geometric-algebra`, but `lean-ga` is shorter and it sounds not bad.
